Um, uh, you've, Greg and I have introduced ourselves.
Let's get, uh, um, Carl, introduce yourself,
Carl's member of And
Ua. I'm a green
MP TE called Papa,
and I am the disability spokesperson for the Grains
Yoda. I'm Barton.
This is my wife Ally.
Um, Ali's unable to speak,
so she'll be using a eye gaze computer,
um, to talk with that.
Alright. Well look, um, we've, uh, obviously had the, the,
um, reports with this,
but feel free, um, to make some submissions
and, uh, available questions, hopefully.
Yeah, for Sure. So look forward to hearing from you.
Um, so my full name is Paul Barton.
Um, my wife was diagnosed with me neuro disease in 2021.
Um, she was a nurse, ICU nurse.
We were living in Sydney at the time.
Um, and it started off in a right ring finger
and then spread through her arm, into her leg.
Um, we moved over here. She's, um, Kiwi citizen.
We moved over here in 2021, end of that year.
Um, because Ally needed support.
We weren't able to get support where we were living.
Um, so I'm her full-time carer
and that's my, that's my job
through individualized funding and everything.
Um, so I'm looking after Ally.
Unfortunately, she's unable to do anything for, for herself.
Um, her speech kind
of declined since 2022
and she's using a grid pad now in a high gaze.
She can operate a wheelchair.
Um, she can walk with my assistance
or a walking frame, but she has to have the brakes on,
so she just pushes it along.
That's how she gets around at home.
Um, she's probably one of the youngest people
with motor neuron disease in the entire country.
Um, and the frustrating part of the illness is
that most people are given three to five years
and there's nothing that anybody can do.
So whenever you ask a question
we don't know is usually the answer.
Nobody knows what causes it.
Um, there is one drug that's prescribed that may
increase your life by three months,
but is that three months walking around
or is that three months when you're in a bed
unable to do anything?
Um, and I, I would accept, we don't know,
um, if I felt that other measures were being taken
or anything had been done.
You know, if, if people were trying everything they
could, I would accept.
We don't know. But, um, what I really noticed is that
upon diagnosis, it's not legally required to be reported
as a notifiable illness.
So there's all this information that's being, uh,
missed out on occupation, age, location,
environment, all of these factors.
If there's a cluster of out of people getting diagnosed,
why are people getting diagnosed at that place?
And making it notifiable, I feel would be the beginning
of understanding this illness
because they can only work out how to treat it
or what causes it if they can get the information.
Um, there's,
the rebuttal I got was, it's not infectious, it's not a risk
to public health, but that's why I wrote this paper
outlining all of the links that have been, um, published
with occupation.
Um, if you live in an area of New South Wales
where there's a high incidence
of cyanobacteria in the water, the bluegreen algae mm-hmm.
Um, you are seven times more likely
to get motor neuron disease.
If you worked in farming and agriculture.
The, the rate of incidence is higher.
If you handle pesticides or ants, the rate is higher.
What we believe caused Ali to reach a tipping point
and have this cascade failure was we needed our bedroom
fumigated three times in six weeks for bed bugs.
They stowed away on a backpack from a hotel.
Um, and then, you know, a couple of months
after that, she started with the tingling in her finger.
But there's so many people being diagnosed with
so many different lifestyles or ways of, um, occupations
or things like that is hard to narrow down
what the common factors could be.
And I feel that making it notifiable would be the start
of figuring out what to do.
Alright, well thank you.
Um, and that's, so got nothing else to add,
so any questions?
Member served debates.
Thank you, chair. Thank you for, uh,
the presentation and for the paper.
And what I'm, uh, struck by in a big way
is the facts that what you are seeking
to do is not something to solve any, your own charge,
but to support, um, the, the prevention of, of,
uh, this disease go forward and that,
and that I, um, am feeling quite strongly.
Um, have you been given any, uh, direction at all
about other ways that the outcome of
ensuring the information collection could occur, um,
could be achieved if, if there been any? Um,
There is an m, m and D registry,
but that is not, um, it's optional.
So the diagnosing physician is not legally obliged
to answer, answer anything.
Um, that comes from, you might be approached by somebody
that says, oh, have you thought about registering?
And then you go, probably, I'll think about it.
You're not rushing out to do that
'cause you've got enough on your plate.
You've got to go through those five stages
of acceptance and everything.
Um, and you've got so much on your, on your mind.
I mean, we don't have any children,
but there's people that are older than Ally
that have this illness and they've got families
and all this kind of thing.
Mortgages, car payments, you can't work.
We'd, we'd love to be working.
Ali is a dedicated nurse,
but unfortunately that's not the case.
So, um, the only thing I could think would be
to make the m and d registry opt out
and upon diagnosis,
you're automatically registered would be a start.
And as I outlined in my paper,
possibly the MND registry could be changed
and the questions that they asked
that I included in the appendices, it could be tailored more
to, to collect the information that would be,
um, gathered if it was made notifiable.
Um, talking with, um, doctor at Massey University and,
and the CEO of the Mindy New Zealand, things that,
that could be asked would be where did you grow up?
Mm-hmm. Um, what age did you first get symptoms?
What was your occupation? Where did you live 30 years ago?
Where did you live 20 years ago?
Where did you live 10 years ago?
Um, and it seems like trivial things,
but it's about narrowing it down and mapping everything out.
And that's the only way I think we're gonna figure
out what causes it.
Only 10% is genetic and familial.
And there is a drug called tosin that's just been approved,
just been approved over here.
Tosin Ali doesn't have that gene mutation.
There's one family in the West coast
and they've had 25 plus family members all having
m and d and it's from this gene mutation.
And the gentleman went to Canada in order to get this drug.
Um, and I think he's moved, he's moved back now, I believe
he is in the Greymouth area and the tofa and is working
and he is able to be working again
and getting his life back.
But for Ali, that's not an option.
And to be honest, people
with this illness just feel like they're not being heard
and they've been given this diagnosis,
diagnosis, which is awful.
And then they just feel like nobody's listening
to them go over there and just succumb quietly
is the harsh reality I think that people are dealing with.
Can I ask a question? Are you aware
Of any country in the world where it is is notifiable?
It is not notifiable in any country at all.
Australia tried, I believe, last year,
and that was started by an MND patient in Melbourne.
Unfortunately, he passed away.
Um, and um, I believe his petition was online on change.org.
Hmm. But that was not
considered by their parliament.
Um, and I tried to present it to show,
really highlight the different factors you've got.
Social financial is a big one.
Palliative care is just equipment.
I mean, this is something that we bought ourselves, um,
before we moved here,
but Ali's been given a big powered wheelchair.
We couldn't bring that on the flight. And that's 20,000.
This is 16,000 just for a grid pad.
Um, so equipment helps,
but it's not gonna change the fact what Ali's dealing with.
Oh, thank you.
I think I probably speak for everyone here When we say that,
you know, you two are a testament to love and caring.
Thank you. And that loyalty,
and it is just a beautiful
to see you obviously adore each other.
Um, yeah. And it's a bit of an honor to to hear from you.
So, um, we are talking about mandatory
and transparent recording of information to share.
And obviously you have actually been navigating this system
in two different countries.
And so how you have said that this is probably
the fastest way to finding out what the causes are.
Can you tell me a little bit more about that?
As I said before, the cost of equipment
and all the, all the professionals
that Ali has seen over the course of this illness, it's just
money, money, dollar signs, expenses and things.
Um mm-hmm. Considering what we're after is information.
Um, I think that is the minimum, the bare minimum
and it's, um, achievable.
It's not like we're asking for a miracle or anything.
There are six things on this list that are not infectious.
And two of the things I could not even get the numbers for,
um, and if you look at the statistics, um,
72 deaths in 1992
and 156 by 2020 from MND.
So the numbers have doubled and it's only getting worse.
So can you say that again, Paul? They were what?
They were what, when
In 1992?
Yep. They were, There were 72 deaths
from motor neuron disease.
Yeah. And then in 2020 you're looking at 156.
In 2020. So 28 years.
So I plotted all this in my paper on
Graph. Yeah,
Yeah. Um,
yeah. Yeah.
159 in 20, in 20, 20 75 deaths in 1992.
Yeah. And New Zealand actually has the highest incident
rates of al disease worldwide.
And because it's a smaller population,
it's not like the states
and you look at the numbers at any point,
there's about 400 people with what Ali's got, um,
about 120 kiwis die every year from it.
So there's always about 400. Yeah.
The numbers are expected to increase worldwide by 69%.
And I think that New Zealand
with it having the highest rates, um, it's obligated
to discover why that is.
And I think it's an opportunity.
I'm not, I'm not trying to admonish anybody
because if you don't know about it, you can't do anything.
Mm. Yeah. But this is an opportunity for New Zealand
to really start taking this illness seriously
and be an example to the world.
And if, if you feel that it's worthy enough to be passed
and made notifiable,
other countries will follow your example.
And I want to try and get it notifiable in England.
I want to try and get it notifiable in Australia.
Um, because I've, I've learned so much from, um,
caring for Ally
and we have a community support group in Christchurch,
and that is set up for patients by patients.
Again, it feels like people
with this illness are being abandoned.
Um, so it's sort of up to the patients
to gather everybody together.
And this illness, the most brutal part
of it, it removes hope.
And once you remove hope from somebody's life,
it's just a quick decline.
I mean, Ally's been over five years since first symptoms
and she's still with us.
We've had people at the group that pass away after 18 months
and you go to the group the first Monday of every month,
and then unfortunately another person has, has passed away.
We have a minute silence and everything,
but it's not for that.
We, we are just to be around each other. Mm-hmm.
Um, but I, I, I wanna change things.
I wanna show that there is hope. Mm.
And that there is a possibility
of just figuring out what links it.
Um, the papers by Dr. Chen have, have proved that
farming and agriculture is the occupation
with the highest incidents.
Yeah. Um, and I know you, you, I've got
to talk about the elephant in the room.
Finance and business
might be affected if we figure out that that is a link
and then we say, okay, farming and agriculture, why is that?
Maybe we need to change the processes.
I'm not here to, to impact business.
I just want to do
what is gonna help people in increase knowledge.
Alright. Well look, thank you very much.
Thank, uh, you've made a a
We're outta time it Yep. Okay.
For the first one. Yeah, yeah. No, that's right.
Well, the, the health department's on
health are online anyway.
Are they? Yes. And, and so, okay, cool. That's fine.
We'll, we will get to them. My question was going
to be about your response to, to
to them, but we'll hear from them.
Yep. Alright.
Alright. Look, no, thank you.
And you've certainly, um, the way you've gone about this is,
um, the way you're able to present Ali.
Well, thank you for making a big effort to get here.
We appreciate you being here.
And there's, uh, um, we'll,
we'll now we'll hear from the ministry,
but also, um, be making our decision.
So with yourselves
and the courage you've shown coming here, um,
echoing loud in our ears and our consideration, did you have
That thing that you wanted to say quickly?
Ali prepared something for you.
Thank you for taking the time to read
and listen to the advocacy of my husband Paul.
He represents those of us who feel voiceless,
whose voices have been taken away by m and d.
I hope you can take a moment to consider this issue
and make a difference in the lives of people living with m
and d once again.
Thank you.
Alright, well, well thank you.
And thank you for the work for not only do yourselves,
but also for all those, I think probably we are all aware
of people, um, that, uh, are in similar conditions
and similar situations. So thank you
Speaking on that, the fact that, that you're actually
listening to me and I really appreciate that.
And I just, I'm just glad
that you're actually seeing the significance
of this illness here.
Illness and that you're willing to talk to me about it.
So that means a lot. Thank you for your time.
I really appreciate the chance. No worries. Thank you. Thank
You. Alright, thank you.
Now are you,
we are just gonna hear from the ministry.
Are you keen to remain to hear from that? Yeah,
That's fine. I'm just fine.
We'll go to, um, our next submitter now is,
um, Dr. Jones, is that right?
Yes. Can you hear me? Yes.
Yeah, we can see you and hear you, Dr. Jones. Great.
Very good. Uh, thank you very much, um, committee members
and, and also to, uh, uh, Paul
and your partner Paul.
Um, thank you so much for this petition.
So, uh, my name's Nicholas Jones.
I'm the director of public health, uh,
currently working in the Ministry of Health.
And I'm here today to speak to our response to the petition.
Um, firstly, I just want to acknowledge the importance
of this condition.
And as, um, Mr. Barton has very adequately
and eloquently pointed out the importance of this condition,
uh, particularly with the potential linkage to
to chemical exposures.
Um, we agree, um, we agree
that this is a very important issue
and, um, we also agree with the need, uh, to do,
to gather the required information to be able to try
and identify what the causes of this condition are,
identify clusters, all, all of the objectives actually
that have been raised in the petition.
Um, at this stage, the ministry's view is
that we don't support it being made a notifiable disease.
Um, but having said that, um,
we are very interested in working with the, um, registry
to see if there is a way for that registry
to be improved in such a way that it would, uh,
collect the required information that would be required
to help address these questions.
Um, on the matter of, uh,
whether it should be made mandatory
or not, um, there isn't a legislative basis at the moment
for, um, that registration to be made mandatory,
but I would support, um, the idea, um, you know, potentially
of considering an opt off at the moment.
There isn't a way for us easily to do that.
Uh, I guess the question would be,
the counter argument would be, um, for, uh,
a an effective person who really didn't want
to share their information, um, with the registry, um,
do we collectively think
that they should be compelled to do so?
Uh, and that's probably a question that I think best sits,
um, with, you know,
my colleagues there on the select
committee and in parliament.
Um, as to what is the strength of the argument
for making out a compulsory registration with the,
um, with the register?
Um, there is some work going on.
I think that it's helpful for the committee to be aware of.
Um, we are formally reviewing our criteria
for making notifiable diseases
notifiable under the Health Act.
And, um, we're early in the phase
of this, uh, this piece of work.
We will be consulting more widely on the criteria,
as has been discussed.
Uh, typically the criteria are primarily around the need
for there to be some public health action taken as a result
of the occurrence of the illness.
And typically this is in relation
to an infectious disease, but not always.
There could be, uh, non-infectious diseases where, um,
for example, lead poisoning is a good example
where there is a need for an urgent, uh,
public health action to ensure that say, children
who have elevated levels of lead are not being exposed
to further, um, contamination
with this particular disease.
Uh, and they're likely to be, you know, a long latency
between when the person is initially exposed
to whatever cause and when they start to develop symptoms.
Um, it's quite difficult to make the argument
that there is a need to act on every individual case
and to conduct a detailed case follow up.
Um, where, where I would agree, uh, with Mr. Barton is
that there is a very solid argument for ensuring
that information is collected about cases.
So that the big picture in terms
of what's going on in New Zealand
and what are the kind of things that might be contributing,
are collected, that information is collected.
Um, we have offered to work with the, um,
register and, and with Mr. Barton, uh,
to see if there are ways in which that can be expanded.
Uh, I am, um, not sure of the way in which
that register is currently funded, so there may be issues
that be need to be worked through in terms of, um,
the contractual relationship that they have
and what the expectations are In terms of, um,
the expectations for that, for that registry,
it's primarily, it would appear focused on collecting,
inform clinical information,
so information about the person's, uh, clinical state, uh,
their state, their needs,
and potentially facilitating their access to trials.
Um, as has been mentioned, the po potential for there to be,
um, you know, early trials
and people who are registered would then be eligible
to be able to access those.
But I'll probably leave it there
and, uh, open open to taking questions.
Alright. Uh, Mr. Bates,
Thanks, chair. I've
got a couple of questions if you don't mind.
Um, thank you for the, the contribution there.
A couple of questions, firstly around the notifiable,
um, case.
Is the criteria
and the reason for, um, this not being able
to be notifiable predominantly driven by the criteria?
Um, or is it a policy choice
that Health New Zealand get to make?
If you understand what I'm asking.
Um, the, the, the choice actually is not,
the policy is not set by Health New Zealand.
It's, it's actually set by the Ministry of Health,
um, sorry,
The Ministry of Health. Yeah,
Yeah. Um,
so the, I mean, the essential,
the balancing act is to balance the, um,
benefits in terms of immediate actions with, um, both the,
the costs of, uh, the service in terms of where we,
where we deploy the public health service
and the medical offices of Health who receive these, um,
these notifications.
Um, because they are receiving many notifications
for many different diseases.
So we, we have to also be cognizant of that resource
and how it's deployed.
Uh, and clearly when there are immediate benefits such
as ensuring, um, the contacts of a case
of infectious disease are given some kind of intervention
to prevent it spreading, there is an urgency and,
and immediacy to the, you know, the rationale for making
that a, a, um, notifiable disease.
But essentially the, the criteria
at a high level are about whether
or not there is an individual case response required.
Um, then there is, um, the significance
of a prevention program.
So if we have a, for example, a, uh, an immunization program
that is designed to try
and prevent diseases, then it is very useful
to make it notifiable
to be ensuring whether we're actually being effective in
terms of our prevention activities.
Um, then obviously we do take into account, um,
whether a particular population groups, um,
are more effective than others.
And, you know, in a lot of conditions we do see Maori
and Pacific people being more effective than others.
And there is a strong argument for us having a good way
to ensure that we are actually working towards equity
in terms of outcomes.
And then, um, other subpopulations, um,
you know, we, we are conscious
that there may be other populations, disability populations,
for example, and obviously this is one case
where disability is, is important here, um,
where we would be considering that as a criteria.
Um, and then there are emerging conditions, um,
or reemerging conditions where we need
to be collecting better information to be able to assess,
um, what's going on in terms of trying to identify, um, the,
um, likely causes.
Um, clearly anything which is causing an outbreak, um,
is a priority, um,
because of the need to sort
of take wider outbreak activity responses.
So that's the sort of general area of criteria.
Um, and, um,
sorry, what was the rest of the rest of
the, that you said? What was the,
Just, just we're, look, we're just time,
little time constrained.
If you wouldn't mind just sort
of perhaps being a little more succinct with the answers.
Um, be useful, Carl.
Yeah, thanks chair. And happy to take this
as written afterwards if easier.
But from a legislative perspective, would adding
public health research as one of the criteria be a
way of, uh, driving it being a notifiable disease and
or is there a simple legislative change, um,
that would address the existing register, uh,
as an opt out option?
Great question.
Uh, I'll have to come back
to you on the register question.
I believe that cancer registration does have some
legislative basis, um, which could be extended to, I think
to neurological conditions.
Mm-hmm. Um, but I'd, I'd have
to come back to you on the detail of that. Happy with
That. Thank you. Could
I ask a question quickly, please?
Is that, yeah, certainly. Is that okay? Um, thank you.
So in my paper, um, there are six
diseases on the notifiable diseases
list that aren't infectious.
And I was informed that that was the main
criteria for them being there.
Um, two of the things led absorption
and poisoning from chemical
contamination of the environment.
I couldn't actually gather any data from the Ministry
of Health regarding that.
Um, and then 10 tenas
and, um, decompression sickness, they only account
for eight deaths in 2019,
but in 2019 there was 138 deaths from
Melbourne neuron disease.
So I really feel that
you can't put your head in the sand about this illness you
are at, you're at the kind of tipping point where
it is only going to get worse.
And the financial, financial impact to the government
and the country is not sustainable if
more people get this illness. Alright,
Look, we'll, we'll take that
as a statement rather than necessarily as a question,
I think as a, as, as a, as an observation. Well,
Well my, my question was, um, if all of these things
with such little deaths reported can be on the notifiable
list, why isn't m
and DAA, um, a able to be on that list as well,
given its severity in comparison?
I could provide a very brief answer if
that would be helpful to the committee.
Certainly. Um, so, so the data,
firstly the availability, the data, data as it happens,
the environmental aspects of notable disease reported
through a just different system.
It's called Environmental Health Indicators.
So you will be able to get hold of those data.
Uh, it's just unfortunately at a different,
different, uh, website.
The second question was, um, conditions like,
um, TSIs, et cetera.
We are reviewing the list, as I said, in in some
of those may be removed for the very reason
that you mentioned that they're exceedingly rare.
Um, and the question then I think was, oh,
poisoning is associated with the environment
that is available, but, uh, it's very underutilized.
And in fact, that is one of the reasons why, um,
we would want to think carefully about whether actually
notification is a more effective way
of collecting the data than actually using a register
where the, the practitioners
who are making the diagnosis are
referring directly to the register.
Alright. Look, look. Well, thank you.
Um, that brings us to the end of our, um, session today.
We, we do have other submitters waiting,
which is why I do have to keep moving.
Um, but look, thank you.
I think you've made some, um, from some very good reports.
Um, you've really put some more, um, not only some more, um,
reality around it, but also it's helped us
to understand much more.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, um, for all our submitters.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh, Dr. Jones,
Thank you. And
Paul, and of course Ali, thank
You. Thank you,
Thank you.
We're just bringing Mark and Oh,
thank you.
Have a seat over right there.
So we've got Mark on Zoom,
uh, mark, I've just, you've got your camera on.
There you are. Hello. Thank you.
Thank you Paul. You thank you. Done. Well done.
Good, thank you.
Alright. Um, good.
Alright, mark, so now we've got, uh,
take your submission as read.
Um, you've got the committee here.
I'm not sure if you're on before,
but just I'll, I'll introduce yourselves just for the, um,
health of those who are in the room.
Greg O'Connor, the, uh, chair.
I'm the deputy chair and the MP for Mamu, Kiki
and Central, uh, member for,
I'm a green party list mp.
Thank you. Alright, thank you.
Right now Mark, ready for 10 minutes, um,
and we have a, a med safe in the room
with us here now as well.
So floor is yours, hopefully leaving time for questions.
Awesome. Yeah, so basically, you know, you've read this,
the things that I've sent through.
Um, yes, I acknowledge that Clozapine is a very,
um, risky drug.
Um, although the Federal drug agency in the US um,
at the end of last, uh, last month, um, has
downgraded the, um, monitoring requirements for Clozapine.
And there's also debate within the UK as to whether, um,
that monitoring needs to be downgraded as well.
Um, because any death,
um, of a patient who's on Clozapine gets reported
as a Clozapine death when there can be many,
many comorbidities for this group of people.
Uh, so it might not necessarily be Clozapine.
That's been the, the primary factor in that, uh, death.
Um, the issue with specialism is, is difficult
because unfortunately it's a bit of a closed shop in that
you have to be a doctor to be a member of the,
uh, medical colleges.
So they're all, uh, Australian
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
You have to be a doctor to be a member of that.
And they're the only people that do the training courses
to allow you to be registered as a specialist.
Um, nursing council
or nurse practitioners originally made us choose
an area of practice.
So for me, I am an adult mental health nurse practitioner.
If I want to work in other areas, I'd have
to do further training to add those areas
to my registration.
But in 2017, nursing council stated
that nurse practitioners were basically a broad
generalist scope of practice.
Um, so therefore no one is a specialist anymore.
And nursing council have no interest in, um,
stating whether I'm a mental health NP
or someone's a, a cardiology np.
So the professional body for nurse practitioners, NPNZ,
they're gonna be working on a credentialing program, um,
to endorse nurse practitioners
as a specialist in a certain area,
which may help part of this problem.
Um, it's interesting in the evidence that Med Safe gave,
that they talk about the research study that, um,
brought Clozapine back into use back in 1990.
So that actually only involved 417 patients, um,
and only 217 of those were actually on Clozapine.
And of those two trials, which involved 417 patients, one
of them was stopped early, um, due to side effects.
So although it was brought back with strict guidance
and this kind of, um, it wasn't exactly a massive study that
that did that, the main issue for me, um,
is around practice.
So I've, I've had a patient in today who's seen a
psychiatrist to be prescribed methylphenidate.
I actually did a file review on this patient
and on the 3rd of September, I made that referral
to the consultant psychiatrist who asked them to be seen,
um, to restart this medication that they want as a child.
They had an appointment on the
19th of November that was canceled.
They had a further appointment on the
3rd of December, and that was canceled.
And they've only seen this psychiatrist today.
So that's three months after I've made the referral.
And if I as a, as a person who's been a mental health NP
for 11 years, and a mental health nurse for nearly 30 years
was allowed to initiate this medication,
this patient would've had three months worth of treatment
and they would've been potentially in a much better space.
Or I'd know if it hadn't worked
with nurse Practi practitioners
where independent autonomous practitioners, so the,
the word supervision has connotations in medicine.
A psychiatrist is clinically responsible for the work
of registrars and house officers and ti who work under them.
But as nurse practitioners,
we are solely responsible for our own practice.
If we make a mistake, it's on us.
So we don't really have supervision as such
because there is no implication to a consultant psychiatrist
who we discuss a case with
that there's any clinical responsibility for them,
for any outcome of that discussion.
So that's one thing to bear in mind.
And, and that's really all I've got to add,
add to what I, what I wrote.
Alright, thank you. Um, question Greg
Fleming? No, no, I don't, no,
It's, it's covered, covered everything. I
Was gonna say. Thank you very much, mark.
It's, uh, um,
Question. You've probably guessed
that I'm an ex police officer.
Are these drugs, drugs of abuse, uh, have, are they, are,
are they ones that do get redirected, um, into the So
Clozapine certainly, certainly not.
Dexamphetamine and Methylphenidate are, um,
I noticed in the, um,
med safe submission they were talking about there could be
implications for the amount of medications prescribed.
I would also challenge that.
'cause at the moment what the practice is, is
that nurse practitioners will see the patient,
they will discuss it with their consultant colleagues,
and the consultant colleagues puts pen
to paper to do the prescription.
And all we would be doing is missing out that middleman
that, you know, 'cause we don't have
that many psychiatrists.
I think we've got, uh, 156 shortage in New Zealand.
So we don't have the resource to be doubling up on something
because they're not gonna see the patient.
They, they know us. They, they trust us
as nurse practitioners and I trust our judgment.
You know, myself, I've covered an
inpatient ward five months.
Um, I've covered an inva cargo on their on-call rotor.
So, you know, if I'm trusted to do that,
why can't I be trusted to initiate a medication
that I know very well.
Yeah. Oh, you,
Thank you. Thank you. This is,
um, a really topical issue
and I know that it really affects people's lives.
So thank you so much for bringing it to us.
We really, um, wanting to hear from you.
Um, I hear from constituents, um, often about, um,
the barriers in place to actually accessing
not just medication, but the appointments as well.
And one of our constituents has just come with a
17-year-old son who, um, was diagnosed
as a DHD when they were five,
has had medication over their life
and went on a waiting list last year to be rediagnosed so
that they could have access to medication
and have just received a letter to say that
because they will be turning 18 in six months time
and the wait list is still 18 months
that they need this re diagnosis of something
that they have had since they were five.
And I just wanna know how would, like,
could we also get nurse practitioners to, um,
to prescribe for young people as well?
The, this drug you're talking about or
Generally Yeah. Yeah. This,
this drug in in particular, yeah.
Yeah. There's a number of nurse practitioners
who work in the child and adolescent area, um, both
as mental health NPS
and as child, um, you know, children's, uh, nps working in
that kind of pediatric space.
Mm-hmm. Um, the consultant psychiatrists that work
with a couple of our mental health mps have written
to the ministry before asking that their colleagues,
the mps be allowed to prescribe these medications.
They say, you know,
you've got people who've been seen in remote clinics by nps
and then they have to go through this, this rigmarole
to get it signed off by the consultant.
And it is just, um, an administrative nightmare
and causes a necessary delay for the patient,
like my patient who's just had
to wait three months for treatment. Mm-hmm.
Alright. Look, thank you very much, mark.
We, we've got the, uh,
nurse practitioners Chelsea Wilmot coming on now
after you, so, um, we're welcome to remain for that.
So, uh, do we have, uh, Ms. Wilmot there?
Uh, oh, here we go. Welcome.
How are you? Very well, thank you.
You, you heard the previous submission from Mark?
I certain, I certainly did.
And what a great, what a great question
that you've put forward, um, regarding, you know,
how can we, uh, how can we better use the workforce
that is already exists in healthcare to help reduce,
you know, all of these systemic delays across the healthcare
system and nurse practitioners are in such a great position
to be able to really help.
So, um, you would've seen the letter that I sent in,
in support of Mark's, um, position.
You have read that. Um, I really wanted, so my role, I'm,
I'm a nurse practitioner, rural, uh, primary care in, uh,
central Otago,
but I also am the chair of, uh,
nurse practitioners New Zealand, which is the,
the professional organization that represents our workforce.
And so I just wanted to be able
to elaborate a little bit on the letter that I wrote
and just give you a little bit more context about the
nurse practitioner role.
Uh, and obviously am able to help
and answer any questions that you may have.
So nurse practitioners are, do get there,
there is a little bit of confusion about the role
of nurse practitioners in at present, and it is
because we are small in numbers of a, um, 82,000
nursing, uh, workforce nurse practitioners currently are
818, uh, as of today of that, uh, number.
So we are a small group, uh, but we are rapidly growing.
We are going, we expect that our workforce numbers will,
will double and continue
to grow significantly in the next five years.
And I think the word nurse does bring some challenges
for understanding what, uh,
the nurse practitioner role does and is capable of.
So nurse practitioners working a completely different scope
and a legal framework
and regulatory framework to that
of a registered nurse or an enrolled nurse.
They, where registered nurses,
we do have designated prescribing, uh, different levels
of prescribing with significant restrictions around
what registered, registered nurses can and can't do.
Nurse practitioners are, as Mark has said, um,
authorized prescribers and they do have the same role
and do fulfill and undertake the same role as many
of our medical colleagues do.
Often nurse practitioners across this country at the moment
are the sole, uh,
practitioner providing a lead care healthcare service for,
uh, a group of, uh, patients, hanau and communities.
And therefore the restrictions that are currently in place
around the medications that Mark has mentioned
do really burden the patient's journey, uh, in, in terms
of being able to access equitable
and timely care and treatment.
So nurse practitioners are, um, you know, they,
they are qualified in a different way to registered nurses.
On average, it takes a nurse practitioner between, you know,
eight to 10 years to to be competent
and skilled enough
through very vigorous advanced clinical education to be able
to work at the level that they do.
And so, as Mark mentioned, our regulation within, uh,
nursing is quite different to that of medicine.
Medicine has the medical council with various vocational,
uh, qualifications and acknowledgement as specialists.
Uh, the nursing council of New Zealand does not
yet acknowledge
or recognize specialists, uh, nurse practitioners
that are lead care providers and work in specialty areas.
So, uh, n nurse practitioners New Zealand who, um,
who I'm a part of, we are, as Mark mentioned, building,
having to build our own vocational training
and specialty endorsement processes,
which we are currently just in the beginning of.
And because mental health
and addiction, uh, nurse practitioners across
the whole lifespan with all the different subspecialties
are seen and viewed
as specialists in their own right in a
specialty area of practice.
We are running our pilot endorsement program with that group
as one of our first groups
because we understand the urgency needed for
timely diagnosis of number of things in this country
with mental health and addictions.
And so we, we will have that form of vocational training
and recognition in due course.
But we have an existing very highly specialized workforce
who, as Mark said, many um,
psychiatrists in this area are in full support
of nurse practitioners being able to work in the role
that they are trained to do
and with the, uh, the actual, um, you know,
without the restrictions to be able to lead the care
and make appropriate diagnosis
for those particular patients.
So we see this as a real barrier for not only the role
of nurse practitioners and how it was intended and designed,
but also for patients and, and, and families.
It's just, well, we have a solution, we just need to be able
to make sure
that we can practice in the way that we need to.
Alright, thank you. Um, just one thing.
It sounds like you are broadly advocating
that there should be a much broader range of
prescribing abilities beyond just these drugs.
Is that right? You'd like to see? That's
Correct. Section 29
in the Current Medicines Act is a significant
barrier for nurse practitioners. Significant.
Alright, thank you. Um, members, any further questions?
Alright, thank you very much. Um, we, you're
So welcome.
Okay. And we have meds safe with us now, so welcome.
Who's welcome to the table. Yes.
Come on up and I'll get you to introduce yourselves
and, uh,
thank you. Good luck. Right.
So, um, my name is Chris James.
I'm the group manager for, uh, meds Safe, the
medicines medical device regulator.
Um, uh, in, in New Zealand, I'm joined by, um, Susan Ian,
the, um, SAP's head of Clinical Risk and, um,
and Matthew Spencer, uh, manager of product regulation.
And we also have, uh, Alistair Shum,
who's our active manager of Medicines Control.
Uh, um, so thanks very much for the opportunity to talk
to the committee and, um, particularly like
to thank the petitioners, uh, for their efforts.
Um, I also want
to particularly acknowledge the questions raised
and also acknowledge the, um, that expertise
that nurse practitioners bring, uh, to our health system
and also the opportunities for
how we best use our health workforce in New Zealand
and the opportunities there are for that.
I'm a registered pharmacist myself,
and so I know full well how, how, uh,
many opportunities there are for better use
of the health workforce in New Zealand.
Um, so obviously you've, you've got our submission.
Um, what I wanted to do was give you a little bit
of information about Medisafe
and then talk about what is happening particularly in these
two areas with, um, methyl, um,
methylphenidate d amphetamine and Clozapine, um,
and, and what's planned.
So, um,
so Meso regulates therapeutic products, uh,
under the Medicines Act.
Uh, we also have a number of, uh, um, roles in terms
of administering medicines under the misuse
of Drugs Act as well.
And that's particularly relevant to
medicines like Methylphenidate and Dexamphetamine.
Um, MedStar's responsible for applying a framework
of control, so designed to ensure
that therapeutic products are available in New Zealand, uh,
for those, uh, that can be expected
to have greater benefits, uh, compete with the risks.
And one of our roles is to, um, is to,
um, have provisions in place where we can, um,
either recommend or put prescribing restrictions in place,
um, that, that control medicines, availability,
medicines who can prescribe medicines.
Now, the key thing there is that, um, Medisafe continually
reviews these controls, um,
and as more information, uh, presents, so for instance,
some controls put in place many years ago on meth,
methylphenidate and dexamphetamine, um,
may not be the same now in terms of risk of diversion.
And I think that was a question that you had chair, uh,
earlier around, um, your ex role in police.
So back in the, uh, in the eighties, I think around the time
of the war on drugs, the, uh, in the Nixon administration,
the US it was a really, um, big, um,
shut down on a access
and availability to medicines that could be diverted.
And so Methylphenidate
and Dexamphetamine one of those now I'll,
I'll very quickly get to what we're gonna do about that.
So, um, so with Methylphenidate
and Dexamphetamine being used to treat a DHD, um,
approval from the Minister of Health is required
for health practitioner to prescribe these medicines.
And that's through Regulation 22 of the me,
the Misuse of Drugs Act.
That's delegated to the Ministry of Health,
which is administered by Medisafe.
Uh, currently the initiation of prescribing, uh,
for a patient is restricted to specialist holding, uh,
medical training and a DHD assessment diagnosis.
It's typically pediatricians
and psychiatrists ongoing prescribing, uh,
by medical practitioners
and nurse practitioners to treat a patient under their care.
Um, when acting on the recommendation of the specialists.
Now what we've been in terms of what the current work is
that's happening, uh, Medisafe is working with p uh,
on reviewing those restrictions
and, um, has, uh, had a number
of multidisciplinary, uh, meetings with psychiatrists,
pediatricians, nurse practitioners involved, gps
and pharmacists to look at, um, do those,
do those restrictions need to change?
Um, and the, the concerns around version
of those particular medicines perhaps aren't as high
as they were, uh, 20 or 30 years ago.
Uh, we've been talking with, uh, the police
and with, um, uh, around evidence for that.
And so we are looking to go out for a consultation,
it'll be joint consultation with Farag to, uh,
and we expect to do this before Christmas
or going well to say we are looking at the restrictions.
We propose relaxing those, um, in terms of ages,
age ranges for, for who can prescribe those medicines
and getting feedback.
We expect to get a lot of feedback. Mm-hmm.
And we expect to get quite diverse views.
So what we do know is when, um, PX initial step, they had a,
a requirement for funding where you had to renew your,
essentially you had to get a renewal of your, and go
and see a specialist to do that, to continue
to get these medicines.
Um, they've removed that renewal, uh, when they went out
for consultation, they got a lot
of feedback both for and against.
So, um, so there are quite diverse dispute.
But anyway, um, that is what is planned.
And then obviously be looking at that feedback
and providing information to,
I know Minister Ducey would be very interested
and Minister Seymour, uh,
and looking at making changes,
um, for Clozapine.
Uh, oh, sorry. Did anyone have any,
any questions or do you want me to keep going?
So you'd like to treat these as different, important,
we treat them as different.
Yeah. So yeah, substances, drugs, in terms of,
they're quite different medicines
and they are restricted under different
parts of the legislation.
Um, and as, as Mr.
Boltman said, they, um, they, they're quite, you know,
they're quite different in terms of, uh, risk
of diversion, et cetera. So for clo
Okay. May maybe just
ask you, so what's the grouping?
Is, there's no real grouping then as a, as a broad grouping
for these three drugs that we're talking about.
Um, I think the broad grouping, uh, would be that, uh,
there are restrictions on
what nurse practitioners can prescribe, um,
who I'm not speaking for the nurse practitioner group,
but, um, so Clozapine is an anti-psychotic, um,
and lymph forniate
and d many use for the treatment of A DHD.
Um, so that's why I, so
They're quite different classes of drugs almost.
They're, yeah. Yeah. Right.
Oh, thank, thank you for that
because that didn't really it off.
No, that's fine. Um, so with Clozapine,
we've been looking at Clozapine for many years.
Um, so Clozapine prescribing restrictions were updated in
2014, uh,
that followed a consultation which was
completed in May that year.
Uh, which in which then included a statement
that allowed nurse practitioners to prescribe Clozapine, uh,
but under the supervision of a psychiatrist.
And, um, what we have
seen there is obviously there are a number of companies
that have medicines that are clozapine different brands.
Not all the companies updated their medicine product
information sheets.
Uh, and so we, we think there's potential for a bit
of confusion about what is able to be done and what isn't.
Um, so, um, with
the other change that was made was
that medical practitioners do have wider prescribing rights
than nurse practitioners.
Uh, and medical practitioners can also prescribe
for a patient, uh, whose illness is well controlled
and in collaboration with a community mental health team.
So there are two things that we
wanna do there with Clozapine.
The first is we wanted to clarify any confusion
and make sure all those medicine, um,
information sheets reflect the legislative prescribing
requirement and also ensure that that wording's very clear.
Uh, the second thing we want to do is to go out
for consultation the first half of next year, um, to say,
are these prescribing rights, right?
Mm-hmm. Do they need to change?
Um, and obviously we are very interested
to hear from the nurse practitioners, uh,
and then put a new changes in place that need to be done.
Um, I guess the last point I would make is in terms
of consultation, it's really important
that we consult widely.
Um, I, I've tested, um, the need for,
for changing prescribing rights, um,
and uh, just, you know, very briefly
and there does seem to be support, which is great.
Um, I think we will get diverse views
and it's just really important that different specialties
the public get to feed in
and then we can, um, take recommendations from there. When
Can we expect that submission time to start?
Uh, so we are, we are looking at first half of next year.
Perfect. Yeah.
Just a broader, can we expect the p you note your
pharmacist self, can we expect the pharmacy, um, people
to come in and with similar,
because I know I note that there is, uh, a, a sort
of move for pharmacies to be able
to increase their prescribing abilities too. Yeah,
I'm, Are we gonna end up in
like likely having a same submission from a pharmacy group?
Um, I wouldn't wanna speak for the pharmacy group
and take a different hat.
Well just pharmacy introduce yourself as a pharmacy.
I think the work, We,
we would probably include that in the consultation.
'cause as you say, we do have increasing numbers
of pharmacy prescribers as well who are working
very closely in the community with other teams,
including mental health teams.
And, and we'd like to have, have some
of the same perhaps issues. So
I'm sure yeah, there's, I think there's generally there is
an opportunity to, to better use the workforce
and the workforce is changing in
how they operate in the health system.
Um, I know that the nurse practitioners, for instance,
working in mental health may work in different areas
of scope than say a pharmacist prescriber might.
And that's, that's why we'd go for consultation
to get that information back.
Oh, thank you for that. I know it's a broad
out, broader question,
But, uh, just Interest.
So very clear. Thank you very much.
We, well that's, that's, um, it's,
sorry, one more question.
Obviously these drugs, they do, do they change,
they obviously the, the, the, the brand name changes
the type of drug that doesn't change, does it?
Clozapine will always be clozapine by different
Brands. Yeah, that's right. So
Clozapine is the, the actual
what we call the, the the active substance name.
Yeah. So the medicine name. So any prescribing requirements
would be on clozapine not attached to a specific brand.
No, but you were just saying
that some brands don't keep up the reporting.
Is that right? Or is that going down
Pathway? That's
part of our role is to make sure
that those brands do, do ensure that they keep up with, um,
the medicine information.
So sometimes, for instance, if, uh, if you have four brands
that are approved in New Zealand
and one of them is funded,
the other three might be a little bit slower
and updating their information
because they're not supplying the medicine in New Zealand.
So it's just a matter of us making sure they're
All consistent. So does pharma
only have one Clozapine that they
Fund? There's currently two
funded brands of Clozapine, right.
Um, I think, um, in 2014 our processes
to making sure the product information was updated, um,
were a bit different to how they are now
and we've got much better process now.
So we can keep on top of these things much better
and clear in a clearer fashion and, um,
and inform people, uh,
in a better way when things are changing. Oh
Yeah. Alright,
look, well thank you very much.
It's, uh, very useful. We could probably be here
for another half hour going down this path,
but don't, we're specifically dealing with,
um, this petition.
So, um, we very, very useful
and thank you for your patience today too.
Um, the reason we're a little late, we, we, we we're guided
by when question time finishes before we can start.
So, so for all our submitters that are here, thank you
for your patience on that.
So thanks very much and we'll, uh, what the,
we we'll now report, um, back to parliament, um,
with some recommendations on this.
If there is anything else, we'll, um, we'll get in touch.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks very much. Thank you.
Thank you very much.